Wagtail developer support
Get the reassurance of having experienced Wagtail developers on hand for everything from expert consultancy to general support. Plus, all profits are reinvested back into the Wagtail project.
Expert consultancy from the creators of Wagtail
Our packages are designed to support organisations that have their own internal development teams. These teams might be new to Wagtail or be building something particularly complex.
We can help with things like:
Wagtail setup (including headless)
code reviews
clinics via video calls or pair programming
planning complex features
architectural approaches
hosting and tooling best practice
Finding exceptional support for a CMS can be challenging, but the Wagtail development team’s expertise and responsiveness are unmatched. When our developers encounter a more complex problem, the access we have to the Wagtail support team helps immensely to keep projects moving forward.
Robin Wade
Executive Director, Digital, Syracuse University
Packages for all budgets
We offer four options for support:
Basic (4 hours per month)
Business (10 hours per month)
Enterprise (20 hours per month)
Custom (more than 20 hours per month)
For all packages we’ll start by reviewing your plans together on a team call so we can understand how best to support you.
Once we’ve got you set up, you'll then be able to raise tickets or ask our Wagtail experts questions directly through a shared Slack channel. You can use your monthly time allocation however you like. This might include regular sessions, one-off meetings or more ad hoc requests. We’ll keep track of everything and let you know if you’re nearing your limit.
Supporting the Wagtail open source project
We reinvest all profits from our support service right back into Wagtail. So if you've ever had a question answered on the Wagtail Slack or Stack Overflow, you can thank our Wagtail support clients!
Torchbox has provided the Motley Fool with both excellent Wagtail consulting services by adding numerous new features to the product as well as providing support for issues with running Wagtail on sites with tens of thousands of articles and millions of monthly visitors.
Tim White
Tech Director for The Ascent, The Motley Fool
Want to find out more?
Ian Bellchambers
Chief Growth Officer (Wagtail)
Get in touch
The support service has been exactly what we wanted – available and responsive as needed. We're glad to know everything's in place for when questions come up that we aren't sure how to handle.
Andrew Bunker
Senior Software Developer, Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
Happy partners
Our work
Building an accessible website with the US Design System and Wagtail CMS
Office of Intramural Training and Education (OITE)
3 mins read
See more work posts in this category
Digital products
Wagtail
Public sector
A voyage of discovery with NASA JPL
NASA JPL
5 mins read
See more work posts in this category
Digital products
Wagtail
Public sector
Making the right content easier to find
The Financial Reporting Council (FRC)
4 mins read
See more work posts in this category
Digital products
Wagtail
Public sector
Insights
The design journey behind Wagtail's page editor evolution
Ben Enright
Principal Interaction Designer
12 Mar 2025
/
4 mins read
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory launches on Wagtail CMS
Will Heinemann
New Business Director
8 Mar 2021
/
2 mins read
Hooking up the GOV.UK Design System with Wagtail Accelerator Kit in 1 day flat
Chris Lawton
Senior Engineer
28 Mar 2022
/
2 mins read