Thibaud Colas
Senior Engineer & Wagtail Product Lead
Wagtail accessibility statistics
7 Jun 2023
/
3 mins read
To mark Global Accessibility Awareness Day, we used the entire week to share insights, recommendations and advice to improve digital inclusion and accessibility. As well as a special
LinkedIn Live
, we took a deep dive into accessibility stats and tips from Wagtail Sites. Check out our findings below.
Accessibility checks on Wagtail sites
Here are 4 common issues detectable with our built-in checker:
Accessibility checks on Wagtail sites
button-name
: 65% of Wagtail sites pass this. A button element on the page is lacking a label. This is entirely detectable with automated tests such as those featured in our
built-in accessibility checker
, built on Axe.
frame-title
: 50% of sites passing. A frame (such as an embedded video) is missing its title. Again entirely detectable with automated tests – and very simple to fix once identified!
heading-order
: 50% passing. Some heading levels are getting skipped on the page – always have a main heading (h1) followed by subheadings (h2, h3, etc.).
link-name
: 38% passing. Just like button-name, one of the page’s links is missing its title.
All of those issues are
common on the web
, but with the right tests in place, there is no reason for that to remain the case.
Here is the data for this graph:
Lighthouse checks, 2023-04
.
Mean accessibility scores of Wagtail sites
We see clear improvements over time on accessibility scores of Wagtail sites, but they’re too slow-moving:
Mean accessibility scores of Wagtail sites
This shows the mean accessibility score of Wagtail sites over time, compared to
industry-average figures
. Wagtail sites are consistently doing better – but only just (83 in June 2021, 85 in April 2023 – always one or two points above industry average).
With appropriate targets and ongoing testing, there is no reason all sites couldn’t score a perfect "100" (no issues detected) on those tests.
Data for this chart is from the
Core Web Vitals Technology Report
.
High contrast mode support in Wagtail sites
Accessibility tip #3: Support High contrast mode on your websites! Also known as Contrast themes, it allows users to adjust the colour palette of the site to better suit their vision. Very few websites make adjustments to support it:
High contrast mode support in Wagtail sites
"forced-colours" indicates a website making adjustments for users with custom colour palettes – for example adding extra borders. This is used on 8.13% of Wagtail sites, and 8.69% on the average website.
"prefers-contrast" indicates a website adjusting its styles based on whether users request more or *less* contrast, which is an option in iOS and Android. This is used on 1.19% of Wagtail sites, and 1.11% on the average website.
We’ve made a lot of adjustments in recent versions of Wagtail to better support Contrast Themes / High contrast mode. Here’s an example in the default dark theme:
Default dark theme
Wagtail sites with no detected issues
Aim higher with all things accessibility. Wagtail sites are doing better year over year, but there’s still lots to do:
Wagtail sites with no detected issues
In 2023, we found 4.44% of Wagtail sites had no issues detected, compared to 3.83% in 2022. Those numbers are
above industry averages
but nowhere near our ambitions.
All sites could score a perfect "0 errors" detected - and then further spend time on manual tests which can also uncover fundamental issues.
We hope our commitment to the
ATAG 2.0 standard
will help all Wagtail sites get there, with tools like our accessibility checker paving the way.
Here is the data for this graph:
Lighthouse scores, 2023-04
.
Data and methodology
The data we use comes from a dataset of the world’s top 8M website homepages:
HTTP Archive
. 4,000+ websites in this dataset are identified as using Wagtail, thanks to
Wappalyzer
.
From this dataset, we then extract specific statistics following the methodology of the
2022 HTTP Archive Web Almanac’s accessibility chapter
– but filtering to only assess Wagtail projects.
Find the original blog and more Wagtail resources over on the
Wagtail website.
Learn more about our Accessibility Testing service
We can identify barriers your users may be coming up against, and suggest updates to improve the usability of the site for all.
Get in touch
More
What’s new in Wagtail returns - May 2025
Lisa Ballam
Head of Marketing
4 Apr 2025
/
1 min read
The design journey behind Wagtail's page editor evolution
Ben Enright
Principal Interaction Designer
12 Mar 2025
/
4 mins read
How much power do web assets use?
James Hancock
Engineer
18 Feb 2025
/
4 mins read
See more posts